I would start by saying that i dont know how much liberty I got for coming up with ideas for this so i would assume for a start of an ideea i can ignore
factors like budget.

In my opinion one of the best solutions for this issue is one that is already beeing implemented and tested. I am talking about the drone system that Steve Jobs
is working on to deliver packages from amazon. Of course this would imply that there needs to be an advanced software for the drones. They would need acces
to the satelite and a program that would get coordinates for the location of the delivery and head to that direction. The drone would first need a program to lift
it up, then it would travel through the air and then it would need a carefully implemented program for slowly going down untill the drone hits the soul.
After that, the drone could have a button that would reliese the supplies. When that button is pressed, the package is being let down and at the same time
the drone communicates to the system that the the person got the package and updates the status to "received" so that it doesnt deliver twice to the same person.
This would also require a complex database that has a location for each persons home and saves the coordinates of this place. I dont think the odds of 2 drones hitting
each other mid-air are that high, but there could be implemented a code regarding the order of the deliveries in such way that they have the smallest chance of 
colliding. This would also remove the contact problem, as the drones are not people that can get infected. For safety measures the button for "receiving the package" 
can be desinfected after each delivery.

For the better function of the system the people should select pick-up points on the map as safe as possible, not on the road, not above a tree, etc.

This solution would remove most of the code of the interface, as all it needs is to receive the message from te drone that the package was delivered and to
update into the system the status of the population, which people received and which didnt. But in return, it would require a really complex code for the drones.
All in all, I believe investing time and money into a project like this is worth it as it can be used for any type of delivery, not just the supplies during the
pandemic, and it would fix some of the traffic in high circulated cities. 